---
layout: post
title: Monocle 2.1.0 available through GitHub
description: "Monocle 2.1.0 available through GitHub"
modified: 2016-07-8
category: articles
tags: [releases, v2.1.0]
comments: false
share: true
---

Monocle 2.1.0 introduces some significant improvements and bugfixes, mainly centered around Census, our algorithm for converting relative expression values to transcript counts.

## FEATURES

* Monocle's algorithm for converting relative expression values (e.g. TPMs)
    into absolute transcript counts, called "Census" has been re-designed. The
    new version is much more accurate. Census is available through the 
    relative2abs() function. The interface to this function has changed, and
    the output values will be quite different from the old version. The main
    change is that the version in 1.99.0 reported cDNA counts, as estimated 
    in each cell's cDNA library. Now, relative2abs reports estimates of mRNA
    counts in the lysate. These are easier to compare with experiments that
    estimate mRNA counts via the use of spike-in controls.
    
* A new heatmap function plot_pseudotime_heatmap() replaces the old 
    plot_genes_heatmap().
    
* Lots of new documentation. More to follow in upcoming releases.
    
## BUGFIXES

* Ordering cells with DDRTree no longer compresses cells at the tips of
    trajectories.
    
* Pseudo counts are now applied correctly no matter what the underlying 
    distribution used to model expression is.
    
* Variance stabilization is applied correctly when a CellDataSet object's
    expressionFamily is negbinomial.size().
    
* The gene_id field in results from calculateMarkerSpecificity is now a
    character instead of a factor. This was leading to indexing errors and 
    nonsensical semi-supervised clustering and ordering results. 
    
* BEAM() and plot_branched_heatmap() now use cBind instead of cbind, fixing an 
    issue with sparse matrices.

This is the second public release of Monocle 2 through GitHub. You can check out a full list of features [here]({{site.url}}/features/). 

To upgrade, please see the [getting started]({{site.url}}/getting-started/) page. As usual please report any issues through the issue tracker on the Monocle [GitHub page](https://github.com/cole-trapnell-lab/monocle-release).