---
layout: post
title: Monocle 2.2.0 available through GitHub and Bioconductor
description: "Monocle 2.2.0 available through GitHub and Bioconductor"
modified: 2016-07-8
category: articles
tags: [releases, v2.2.0]
comments: false
share: true
---

Monocle 2.2.0 fixes some problems in Census, adds new documentation, and fixes a few other minor issues. This is the first official release of Monocle to through [Bioconductor](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/monocle.html), in version 3.4.

## FEATURES

* Monocle's algorithm for converting relative expression values (e.g. TPMs)
    into absolute transcript counts, called "Census" has been once again been re-designed. 
    The new version improves robustness across different protocols and experimental 
    designs. Census is available through the relative2abs() function. Expect 
    values from this function to change, but differential expression 
    results to be largely the same or slightly better.
    
* Major expansion of the vignette, including a whole new section on the theory 
    behind Monocle 2's new trajectory reconstruction algorithm.
    
## BUGFIXES

  * Fixed an problem where reduceDimension() would return different results on 
    repeated runs given the same inputs. The problem was actually in DDRTree in 
    two places: kmeans and irlba. We now call irlba with deterministically 
    initialized eigenvectors and kmeans with deterministically selected rows of 
    the input.
    
  * Fixed a problem in classifyCells() related to joining factors and levels. This
    would generate annoying warnings.
    
  * Fixed the check for valid sizeFactors prior to differentialGeneTest(). Without
    this check, differentialGeneTest would report FAIL on all genes because of
    factors not having enough levels. 

This is the second public release of Monocle 2 through GitHub. You can check out a full list of features [here]({{site.url}}/features/). 

To upgrade, please see the [getting started]({{site.url}}/getting-started/) page. As usual please report any issues through the issue tracker on the Monocle [GitHub page](https://github.com/cole-trapnell-lab/monocle-release).